IBX-378: Expand migration doc by providing samples and additional explanations (#1379)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/guide/data_migration.md

# Data migration

> Migrations are commonly used in Ibexa DXP projects that require the same data to be present across multiple instances.

Reviewer: You can use migrations in projects that require the same data to be present across multiple instances.
```

> They can be useful for project templates; Able to store shared data, they can be applied for each new project you start,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They can be useful for project templates. Migrations are able to store shared data, so they can be applied for each new project you start,
```

or incrementally upgrade older projects to your new standard, if needed.
They are a developer-friendly tool that allows you to share data without writing code.

> As a matter of fact, the exact same migrations described here are used in the Ibexa DXP installation's initial setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You can migrate your Repository data, that is Content items, as well as Content Types, languages, Object states, Sections, etc.,
between installations by using the migration command.

## Exporting data

> The easiest way to see migrations in action is to export data already present in your installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see an example of migrations in action, export data already present in your installation.
```

To export Repository content, use the `ibexa:migrations:generate` command.
This command generates a YAML file with the requested part of the Repository.
The file is located by default in the `src/Migrations/Ibexa/migrations` folder.
This directory can be changed in [bundle configuration](#configuration-reference)
(`ibexa_migrations.migration_directory`).

### Example export

``` bash
bin/console ibexa:migrations:generate --type=content --mode=create
```

> This will generate file containing all your content objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This generates a file containing all Content items.
```

    mode: create
    metadata:
        contentType: user_group
        mainTranslation: eng-US
        creatorId: 14
        modificationDate: '2002-10-06T15:19:56+00:00'
        publicationDate: '2002-10-06T15:19:56+00:00'
        remoteId: f5c88a2209584891056f987fd965b0ba
        alwaysAvailable: true
        section: 2
        objectStates: {  }
    location:
        parentLocationId: 1
        parentLocationRemoteId: null
        locationRemoteId: 3f6d92f8044aed134f32153517850f5a
        hidden: false
        sortField: 1
        sortOrder: 1
        priority: 0
    fields:
        -
            fieldDefIdentifier: name
            languageCode: eng-US
            value: Users
        -
            fieldDefIdentifier: description
            languageCode: eng-US
            value: 'Main group'
    actions: {  }
    references:
        -
            name: ref__content__user_group__users
            type: content_id
        -
            name: ref_location__user_group__users
            type: location_id
        -
            name: ref_path__user_group__users
            type: path
```

The output contains all the possible information for a future migration command.

> Parts of it can be removed or modified; You can easily treat it as a template for another content object for user group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parts of it can be removed or modified.
You can treat it as a template for another Content item for user group.
```

For example, you could:

> - Remove `references` if you don't intend to store ID's for future use (see [migration references](#references))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Remove `references` if you don't intend to store IDs for future use (see [migration references](#references))
```

- Remove `publicationDate`, `modificationDate`, `locationRemoteId`,
  as those are generated if not passed (just like in PHP API)
- Add [`actions`](#actions)

> - Add fields for other languages, if you have them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add fields for other languages present in the system.
```

> Similarly you can create update and delete operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, you can create update and delete operations.
```

They are particularly useful combined with `match-property`.

> This option will be automatically added as part of `match` expression in the update/delete migration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option is automatically added as part of `match` expression in the update/delete migration:
```

        mainTranslation: eng-GB
        modifierId: 14
        modificationDate: '2012-07-24T14:35:34+00:00'
        remoteId: c15b600eb9198b1924063b5a68758232
        urlAliasSchema: ''
        nameSchema: '<short_title|title>'
        container: true
        defaultAlwaysAvailable: false
        defaultSortField: 1
        defaultSortOrder: 1
        translations:
            eng-GB:
                name: Article
                description: ''
    fields:
        -
            identifier: title
            type: ezstring
            position: 1
            translations:
                eng-GB:
                    name: Title
                    description: ''
            required: true
            searchable: true
            infoCollector: false
            translatable: true
            category: ''
            defaultValue: 'New article'
            fieldSettings: {  }
            validatorConfiguration:
                StringLengthValidator:
                    maxStringLength: 255
                    minStringLength: null
        # - ...
    actions: {  }

```

Note that you should test your migrations. See [migrating data](#executing-migrations).

!!! tip

>     Migration command can be executed with database rollback at the end with `--dry-run` option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Migration command can be executed with database rollback at the end with the `--dry-run` option.
```

bin/console ibexa:migrations:generate --type=content --mode=create --file=my_data_export.yaml
```

!!! note

>     When migrating multiple files at once (for example when calling `ibexa:migration:migrate` without options)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When migrating multiple files at once (for example when calling `ibexa:migration:migrate` without options),
```

    they are executed in alphabetical order.

### user-context

The optional `--user-context` option enables you to run the export command as a specified User.
The command only exports Repository data that the selected User has access to.

> By default the admin account is used, unless specifically overriden by this option or in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default the admin account is used, unless specifically overridden by this option or in
```

[bundle configuration](#configuration-reference) (`ibexa_migrations.default_user_login`).

``` bash
bin/console ibexa:migrations:generate --type=content --mode=create --user-context=jessica_andaya
```

## Executing migrations

> To import Repository data from a YAML files, run the `ibexa:migrations:migrate` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To import Repository data from a YAML file, run the `ibexa:migrations:migrate` command.
```

Author: The current version is actually correct. This allows executing multiple files and it's intended to be used this way.

> To import Repository data from a YAML files, run the `ibexa:migrations:migrate` command.

Reviewer: or?
```suggestion
To import Repository data from YAML files, run the `ibexa:migrations:migrate` command.
```

Place your migration file in the `src/Migrations/Ibexa/migrations` folder.
The command takes the file name within this folder as an option.

> If file is not specified, all files within this directory will be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If file is not specified, all files within this directory are used.
```

``` bash
bin/console ibexa:migrations:migrate --file=my_data_export.yaml
```

Ibexa Migrations store execution metadata in `ibexa_migrations` database table. This allows incremental upgrades:

> `ibexa:migration:migrate` command ignores files that it had previously executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `ibexa:migration:migrate` command ignores files that it had previously executed.
```

    metadata:
        identifier: foo
    policies:
        -
            module: content
            function: 'read'
            limitations:
                -
                    identifier: Subtree
                    values: ['reference:ref_path__folder__media']

```

By default, reference files are located in a separate directory `src/Migrations/Ibexa/references`
(see [configuration reference](#configuration-reference)
`ibexa_migrations.migration_directory` and `ibexa_migrations.references_files_subdir` options).

Reference files are **NOT** loaded by default. A separate step (type: "reference", mode: "load", with filename as "value")
is required. Similarly, saving a reference file is done using type: "reference", mode: "save" step, with filename.

For example:
```yaml
-
    type: reference
    mode: load
    filename: 'references.yaml'

-
    type: reference
    mode: save
    # You can also use 'references.yaml', in this case it will be overriden
    filename: 'new_references.yaml'
```

!!! note

    You don't need to save references if they are used in the same migration file.
    References are stored in memory during migration, whether they are used or not.

> ## How Ibexa Migrations work

Reviewer: Not enthusiastic about this section. Assuming we have recipes for extending migrations (like with custom actions now, and presumably customer steps in future), does this section give the reader information they need to perform their tasks?

Author: If we remove this here, assuming this is not relevant for customers and only applies to our devs, then this part should become part of `ibexa/migrations` readme.

(not that anybody reads those)

My assumption for providing this is that our devs often use docs as reference or explanation. That's why I added it here. I'm ok with removal.

    Most users don't need to know this, unless they want to customize migrations.

Ibexa Migrations utilize Symfony Serializer component for converting YAML files into Migration Steps and back.
A special serializer service (named `"ibexa.migrations.serializer"`) is created, beside the normal `"serializer"`
one created by the framework (to prevent polluting it with Migration-related services).
Services tagged with `ibexa.migrations.serializer.normalizer` and `ibexa.migrations.serializer.encoder` tags are attached
as it's normalizers and encoders respectively (see
[Symfony serializer docs](https://symfony.com/doc/current/serializer.html#adding-normalizers-and-encoders)).

Steps are converted by services implementing
`Ibexa\Platform\Bundle\Migration\Serializer\Denormalizer\StepNormalizerInterface` tagged with
`"ibexa.migrations.serializer.step_normalizer"`.

Once converted to an instance of `Ibexa\Platform\Migration\ValueObject\Step\StepInterface`, they are passed to
one of `Ibexa\Platform\Migration\StepExecutor\StepExecutorInterface` based services (depending on the type
of Step), which in turn performs the actual execution of the migration.

> ## Creating your own Actions

Reviewer: Note to self -> this could be moved to a separate page in future (this one's getting pretty big)

```yaml
ibexa_migrations:

    # An array of service name strings of services to be made available for type: "service", mode: "call" step.
    # You can use private services here: a dedicated container will become available for that step.
    callable_services:    []

    # Default user identifier for user context for migration commands.
    default_user_login:   admin

    # Default language code for migration commands.
    default_language_code: eng-GB

    # Directory in which migration & reference files are kept.
    migration_directory:  '%kernel.project_dir%/src/Migrations/Ibexa/'

    # Subdirectory in which migrations files are kept, relative to migration_directory.
    migrations_files_subdir: migrations

    # Subdirectory in which files with references are kept, relative to migration_directory.
    references_files_subdir: references

    # PHP's "date" function compatible format. Will be used in datetime normalization.
    date_time_format:     c

    # Defines limits in query result sets when generating migrations.
    # If more than this many objects match, migration will use multiple queries to prevent memory issues.
    generator_chunk:      100
```

> 

Author: ATM no, there is nothing here that isn't in the configuration reference output coming from command.
